ADR: Component adoption strategies (#4786)
primer/react: contributor-docs/adrs/adr-021-component-adoption.md

| Approved | ✅     |
| Adopted  | ✅     |

## Context

When there is a new component added to the library and it is ready for use, we need a clear path for encouraging the adoption of the new component and discourage the use of the old component, if exists.

For example:

{# Tooltip v1 is discouraged #}

```jsx
import {Tooltip} from '@primer/react'

render(
  <Tooltip aria-label="This cannot be undone">
    <Button>Delete</Button>
  </Tooltip>,
)
```

{# Tooltip v2 is the recommended component #}

```jsx
import {Tooltip} from '@primer/react/next'

render(
  <Tooltip text="This cannot be undone">
    <Button>Delete</Button>
  </Tooltip>,
)
```

## Decision

1. Announcement on Primer changelog.
2. Reach out to teams directly, specifically strategical services.
3. If the component is a replacement of an old component, update the old component's documentation to recommend the new component.
4. Leverage eslint rules to discourage the use of the old component. If the component is a replacement of an component that is not accessible, we should consider adding the eslint rule to the Accessibility scorecards.

<!-- Provide information about the decision made by this ADR -->

### Impact

> This ADP doesn't have any impact on the existing components. It only provides a path for encouraging the adoption of a new component.

Author: ```suggestion
This ADR doesn't have any impact on the existing components. It only provides a path for encouraging the adoption of a new component.
```

> # Component adoption

Reviewer: Should we consider moving this ADR into our internal Primer repo? The content seems a bit specific to how we propose component adoption within consuming apps at GitHub, particularly with references to strategic services, the accessibility scorecard, etc. Or do we think contributors at large will benefit from this content?

Author: This is a great question! I wasn't sure if this content is a good candidate for an ADR at first and also since we added the same content to our internal private repo, I think we can close this PR 🙌🏻

let me know though if you have any concern!

Reviewer: No concerns, as long as we make a plan to move this content into our internal team docs as I think it is still very relevant there!

Author: Already merged it to our internal repo ([PR link reference - GitHub stuff only](https://github.com/github/primer/pull/3725)) 😊

## Status

| Stage    | Status |
| -------- | ------ |
| Approved | ✅     |
| Adopted  | ✅     |

## Context

When there is a new component added to the library and it is ready for use, we need a clear path for encouraging the adoption of the new component and discourage the use of the old component, if exists.

For example:

```jsx
// Tooltip v1 is discouraged
import {Tooltip} from '@primer/react'

render(
  <Tooltip aria-label="This cannot be undone">
    <Button>Delete</Button>
  </Tooltip>,
)
```

```jsx
// Tooltip v2 is the recommended component
import {Tooltip} from '@primer/react/next'

render(
  <Tooltip text="This cannot be undone">
    <Button>Delete</Button>
  </Tooltip>,
)
```

## Decision

1. Announcement on Primer changelog.

> 2. Reach out to teams directly, specifically strategical services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Reach out to teams directly. It may be beneficial to prioritize communication with [strategic services](https://github.com/github/accessibility-governance/tree/main/dashboard#strategic-services) (GitHub staff only).
```

3. If the component is a replacement of an old component, update the old component's documentation to recommend the new component.

> 4. Leverage eslint rules to discourage the use of the old component. If the component is a replacement of an component that is not accessible, we should consider adding the eslint rule to the Accessibility scorecards. I.e. the ["use-next-tooltip](https://github.com/primer/eslint-plugin-primer-react/blob/main/docs/rules/a11y-use-next-tooltip.md)" rule for the new Tooltip. Before adding a new rule to the Accessibility scorecards, the folloing steps should be taken to communicate the rule widely with the teams:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Leverage eslint rules to discourage the use of the old component. If the component is a replacement of an component that is not accessible, we should consider adding the eslint rule to the Accessibility scorecard, i.e. the ["use-next-tooltip](https://github.com/primer/eslint-plugin-primer-react/blob/main/docs/rules/a11y-use-next-tooltip.md)" rule for the new Tooltip. Before adding a new rule to the Accessibility scorecard, the following steps should be taken to communicate the rule widely with the teams:
```
